+++
date = 2020-01-10T00:00:00  # Schedule page publish date.

title = "The fission yeast γ-tubulin complex protein Mto2 plays a role in regulating cytokinetic ring constriction"
time_start = 2018-12-11T13:30:00
#time_end = 2016-04-06
abstract = "Animal, fungal, and amoeboid cells assemble an actomyosin ring that constricts the cleavage furrow during cytokinesis. Little is known about the mechanisms triggering ring constriction at the proper time. Prior work on the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe suggested that a checkpoint regulates constriction, but the molecular components and mechanisms of this checkpoint are unclear. The fission yeast cps1-191 strain β-glucan synthase (Bgs1)forms but fails to constrict a contractile ring at 36°C (ref). This strain has a D277N mutation in the gene for β-glucan synthase (Bgs1). However, introducing the bgs1-D277N mutation into a wild-type (WT) background does not elicit the constriction phenotype. To identify the mutation responsible for the failure of ring constriction, we sequenced the whole genome of cps1-191 and identified >250 mutations. We further investigated a S338N mutation in Mto2, a γ-tubulin complex protein. Cells carrying this mutation in a WT background were normal at 25°C and grew normally on solid medium at 36°C. However, 4-33% of mto2-S338N cells built cytokinetic rings that failed to constrict at 36°C. Double-mutant bgs1-D277N mto2-S338N cells have growth and cytokinesis defects resembling cps1-191, suggesting the other mutations do not contribute to the phenotype. The mto2-S338N mutation does not cause complete loss-of-function, as these cells differ from mto2Δ cells: (1) 0-1% of mto2Δ cells failed to constrict their contractile rings; (2) mto2-S338N, but not mto2Δ, cells have a size-sensing defect, because cells that failed to initiate constriction entered mitosis when they were 4.5 μm shorter, on average, than cells with rings that successfully constricted; (3) 30-47% of mto2Δ cells had a curved phenotype shown by only 2-4% of mto2-S338N cells; and (4) 3% of mto2Δ divisions produced one binucleate and one anucleate daughter at the end of cytokinesis, which we never observed for mto2-S338N. Cytokinesis also proceeds normally in mto2-S338C cells, indicating the phenotype is not due to loss of phosphorylation of this residue. Previous work suggested that Mto2 is not involved in spindle pole body microtubule nucleation. Therefore, the arrest of ring constriction in mto2-S338N mutant cells is unlikely to be caused by checkpoint signaling from defects in nuclear separation. Mto2 has been implicated in the construction of the post-anaphase microtubule array, which forms at the cell equator during cytokinesis. Our findings suggest that the microtubule cytoskeleton has a role in promoting actomyosin ring constriction at the normal time in S. pombe."

# Authors. Comma separated list, e.g. `["Bob Smith", "David Jones"]`.
authors = ["SER Dundon", "TD Pollard"]

abstract_short = ""
event = "ASCB/EMBO 2018 - Poster Presentation"
event_url = "https://ascb-embo2018.ascb.org/"
location = "San Diego, CA, United States"

# Is this a selected talk? (true/false)
selected = false

# Projects (optional).
#   Associate this talk with one or more of your projects.
#   Simply enter the filename (excluding '.md') of your project file in `content/project/`.
#projects = [""]

# Links (optional).
url_pdf = ""
url_slides = ""
url_video = ""
url_code = ""

# Does the content use math formatting?
math = true

# Does the content use source code highlighting?
highlight = true

# Featured image
# Place your image in the `static/img/` folder and reference its filename below, e.g. `image = "example.jpg"`.
[header]
image = ""
caption = ""

+++
