+++
date = 2018-01-01T00:00:00  # Schedule page publish date.

title = "The fission yeast γ-tubulin regulatory complex Mto1/Mto2 plays a role in actomyosin ring constriction"
time_start = 2019-05-18T13:00:00
#time_end = 2016-04-06
abstract = "The fission yeast cps1-191 strain expressing a temperature-sensitive β-glucan synthase (Bgs1) was reported to arrest with unconstricted cytokinetic rings. We introduced the reported causative mutation (bgs1-D277N) into a wild-type background and found that actomyosin rings constricted ~10-fold more slowly than the wild type, but did not arrest as reported.  Whole-genome sequencing revealed >250 mutations in cps1-191. We further investigated a S338N mutation in Mto2, a γ-tubulin regulator, for a role in the reported phenotype. Double-mutant bgs1-D277N mto2-S338N cells have cytokinesis defects resembling cps1-191, revealing a role for microtubules in actomyosin ring constriction in fission yeast. Further investigation revealed that the bgs1-D277N mto2-S338N phenotype is not due to complete Mto2 loss-of-function, nor altered Mto2 phosphorylation. However, deletion of Mto2’s binding partner Mto1 recapitulates the cps1-191 phenotype in the presence of the bgs1-D277N mutation. Cytokinesis proceeds normally in mto2-S338N or mto1Δ cells, suggesting that the Mto1/Mto2 complex plays a redundant role in cytokinesis. To our knowledge, this is the first evidence that the microtubule cytoskeleton promotes normal ring constriction in S. pombe. Astral microtubules and the post-anaphase microtubule array, which forms at the equator during cytokinesis, fail to form in mto1Δ cells. In Drosophila, astral microtubules promote Rho activation during actomyosin ring formation. In S. pombe, Bgs1 trafficking contributes to Rho localization at the division site. We propose that, in wild-type fission yeast, Bgs1 recruitment and astral microtubule signals collaborate to activate Rho and promote ring constriction."

# Authors. Comma separated list, e.g. `["Bob Smith", "David Jones"]`.
authors = ["SER Dundon", "TD Pollard"]

abstract_short = ""
event = "Boston Area Mitosis and Meiosis (BAMM) 2019 - Poster Presentation"
event_url = "https://bammmeeting.com/"
location = "Cambridge, MA, United States"

# Is this a selected talk? (true/false)
selected = false

# Projects (optional).
#   Associate this talk with one or more of your projects.
#   Simply enter the filename (excluding '.md') of your project file in `content/project/`.
#projects = [""]

# Links (optional).
url_pdf = ""
url_slides = ""
url_video = ""
url_code = ""

# Does the content use math formatting?
math = true

# Does the content use source code highlighting?
highlight = true

# Featured image
# Place your image in the `static/img/` folder and reference its filename below, e.g. `image = "example.jpg"`.
[header]
image = ""
caption = ""

+++
