+++
date = 2020-01-10T00:00:00  # Schedule page publish date.

title = "Astral microtubules regulate Rho activity and actomyosin ring constriction in fission yeast"
time_start = 2019-12-08T12:00:00
#time_end = 2016-04-06
abstract = "Animal, fungal, and amoeboid cells use microtubules in a mitotic spindle to segregate DNA and an actomyosin contractile ring to form a cleavage furrow during cytokinesis. These different cytoskeletal components must be coordinated to produce viable daughter cells. Work in metazoans has implicated Rho signaling in this integration, though mechanistic details remain incompletely understood. While active Rho is known to localize to the division site in yeast models, evidence for microtubule involvement in its regulation has been lacking. By carefully examining a 20-year-old temperature-sensitive Schizosaccharomyces pombe (fission yeast) strain, we discovered evidence for Rho signaling mediating crosstalk between mitotic microtubules and cytokinesis in this organism. The S. pombe cps1-191 strain was reported to arrest with non-constricting rings at 36°C. Our detailed examination has revealed two insights: 1) rings do not arrest but constrict 30-fold slower than in wild-type cells; and 2) the D277N substitution in β-glucan synthase 1 (Bgs1) that causes temperature sensitivity in the cps1-191 strain is insufficient for the constriction phenotype. Rings in bgs1-D277N cells constrict slower than rings in wild-type cells but faster than rings in cps1-191 cells. Using whole-genome sequencing, we discovered >250 mutations in cps1-191. We further investigated one of these mutations, the S338N substitution in Mto2, a γ-tubulin regulator. Rings constrict as slowly in bgs1-D277N cells bearing the mto2-S338N mutation or mto1Δ (Mto2’s binding partner) as in the cps1-191 strain. However, mto2-S338N or mto1Δ cells expressing bgs1+ divide normally, suggesting the Mto1/2 complex plays a redundant role in ring constriction. Others have reported that mto1Δ cells lack astral microtubules, which we confirm, and we found that mto2-S338N cells also nucleate fewer astral microtubules than wild-type cells. Based on work in other systems, we hypothesized that astral microtubules could influence Rho signaling, which subsequently regulates actomyosin activity. Compared with wild-type cells both mto2-S338N and mto1Δ cells recruited more Rho1-GTP to the equator, where it persisted longer during cytokinesis. Therefore, we propose that the γ-tubulin complex and astral microtubules have roles in coordinating Rho activity and actomyosin ring constriction in S. pombe."

# Authors. Comma separated list, e.g. `["Bob Smith", "David Jones"]`.
authors = ["SER Dundon", "TD Pollard"]

abstract_short = ""
event = "ASCB/EMBO 2019 - Poster Presentation"
event_url = "https://www.ascb.org/2019ascbembo/"
location = "Washington DC, United States"

# Is this a selected talk? (true/false)
selected = false

# Projects (optional).
#   Associate this talk with one or more of your projects.
#   Simply enter the filename (excluding '.md') of your project file in `content/project/`.
#projects = [""]

# Links (optional).
url_pdf = ""
url_slides = ""
url_video = ""
url_code = ""

# Does the content use math formatting?
math = true

# Does the content use source code highlighting?
highlight = true

# Featured image
# Place your image in the `static/img/` folder and reference its filename below, e.g. `image = "example.jpg"`.
[header]
image = ""
caption = ""

+++
